[Music]
you
[Applause]
[Music]
well good afternoon everyone this year
spring comes early later tonight is the
first it's when spring comes in so this
is the first day of spring spring is a
time that of renewal rebirth always a
time of hope
so I think it's significant that we
think about that today we are in dead
winter we know this winter what we're
going through is going to continue for a
while but we also know there's hope and
we know that spring will come spring
will come to Ohio and across this
country and it reminds us of how good
life is and the importance of all of us
doing everything we can to get through
this and to move forward that there will
be a new day coming and if dr. Acton is
right we may even see a baby boom seal
up a bees born and there's nothing more
joyful than the birth of a child so we
have a lot to look forward to I'm gonna
thank all my fellow citizens in Ohio for
what they're doing because it truly is a
patriotic act the individual things that
people are doing what people are doing
to help their fellow citizens what
they're doing to stay away from their
fellow citizens that truly is patriotic
I was reminded this morning and I know
there were headlines across the state
but it's a pretty good headline it was a
pretty good indication what Ohioans and
Americans are doing across our country
good deeds galore so I want to thank
everyone who's been doing good deeds we
have a lot of good deeds ahead of us to
do but thank you so very much for for
doing that my friend Albert Ratner who's
in his 90s remarkable man called me last
night and he said you know Mike he says
when you're trying to grasp how to
explain this to people what we're going
through what lies ahead he said you
might use Pearl Harbor as an example I
said we were attacked
we rallied we fought back it took a
while and it's really true we have been
attacked we've been attacked by this
virus and we're asking our fellow
citizens to do extraordinary acts we're
asking them each one to do something
each one to do the distancing where
we're pulling apart we're asking people
to make the sacrifice don't go on that
Spring Break don't get on that airplane
don't do all the things that we normally
do don't go to the pub don't go to the
bar they'll go the restaurant and each
one of us is making those sacrifices and
just as in a time of war where we've
been in hit by a foreign country when
we've been attacked by this virus we
have to pull together and ultimately
it's going to be the small acts what
seems small of each and every American
that truly is going to make all the
difference in the world
each each Ohioan when I came home last
night
Fran said you know when we have a crisis
9/11 different things that have gone on
through our history Americans have put
out their flight to really show unity so
we're not going to be pushed aside we're
not going to be conquered we're going to
be defiant
and so I'm asking today all Ohioans to
put their flag up fly that flag every
single day if you have an Ohio flag fly
that but most most people have an
American flag put that flag out friend
tells me that she just put ours out on
our front porch
dr. Acton says her husband just put
their flag out and so I asked all my
fellow Ohio citizens to to do that we
will get through this spring will come
and all the joys of life we will again
be able to enjoy we have several
speakers today to kind of give you an
update of what's going on I've asked
people who really have an expertise to
come in I was first start with the chief
justice of the state of Ohio Marine
O'Connor and what the Chief Justice will
do is to talk about the judiciary talk
about the courts co-equal branch of
government and she will then take
questions from the news media and I
would just ask that the questions be
confined to the chief and two issues
obviously in regard to the courts and
the criminal justice system we have
people throughout the state who worked
very very hard who do a great job
whether it's prosecutors whether it's
the courts clerk of courts and we could
go on and on judges and everyone so
chief I'll ask you to come up and say
some some words and really kind of give
a report to the people of the state of
Ohio chief thank you very much thank you
thank you very much governor thank you
for the invitation to participate this
afternoon I want to thank you also for
your courageous leadership on this
subject I think that you have set Ohio
as an example for the rest of the nation
and we're proud this is an unprecedented
time undoubtedly a time when during
during which the judiciary of Ohio as
well as the bar the state and local
leaders must come together to guarantee
the vital and continued operation of the
state's judicial system and the public's
access to justice I both commend and
thank Ohio's judiciary for taking action
issuing orders and considering the
health and safety of the public as well
as their staff all the while mindful of
the structure and dictates of our
Constitution and our laws my intent
today is to let everyone know what the
courts are doing and my expectation of
what they should be doing to continue
operating in a manner consistent with
the state's public health strategy last
Friday I met with the state's state
judicial leadership to discuss the
judiciary's response to this pandemic
after that meeting I sent a lengthy
email to all judges in Ohio in the
meeting and email I emphasized several
key points that I want to highlight
today courts must open must be open to
address emergency and time-sensitive
matters indiscriminate closure of the
courts with no plan for these issues is
not an option judges across each county
must cooperate among themselves to issue
orders and establish procedures
necessary to continue essential court
functions in this rapidly developing
situation and in light of the further
directives of Governor DeWine and health
officials the need for uniform buy-in
and consistency among judges is
paramount
further judges need to consult and
collaborate with local leaders to
develop a plan to ensure essential
access to the courts that it will
continue this collaborative this
collaboration needs to include all
stakeholders clerks of court health and
law enforcement officials attorneys
treatment providers Children's Services
and others these are all essential
members of the operation total closure
of the courts and the clerks of courts
offices presents an access to justice
issue measures can be taken to ensure
access to justice while safeguarding the
health of employees by limiting but not
eliminating access the courts can be
closed to the public for non-essential
purposes I've asked judges to prioritize
their workload to reduce the need for
jury pools in the level of public
traffic in courthouses I encourage them
to maximize technology and to modify
their orders to reduce the need for
face-to-face interaction I urge them to
consider lowering bonds and using
summons instead of arrests to help
minimize jail populations I noted some
creative local solutions to these
problems
and urge courts to use their authority
and their initiative to employ similar
solutions courts all over the state have
responded by issuing orders that do just
that I might add that the website of the
Ohio Judicial Conference which can be
accessed from our website
s-see Ohio gov that's SC Ohio gov
contains the orders issued by the local
courts if you access it you will note
the response by our judiciary for
example courts in Cuyahoga County have
suspended all non time-sensitive civil
and criminal jury trial trials and
they've implemented a jury callin system
so that jurors would not have to appear
unnecessarily also when possible
hearings are being conducted by video to
reduce person-to-person contact
foreclosure actions and sheriff's sales
are stayed for 60 days this will ensure
that individuals are not forced out of
their home during the public health
crisis Jackson County has leveraged
their existing statutory authority under
the Ohio Revised Code to extend speedy
trial time in criminal cases on the
grounds of the governor's emergency
declaration as I've advised Ohio Revised
Code 29 45.7 two states the time within
which an accused may be brought to trial
or in the case of a felony to
preliminary hearing and trial may be
extended during the period by any for
the period of any continuance granted on
the accused own motion and the period of
any reasonable continuance granted other
than upon the accused own motion this
allows for continuances upon reasonable
grounds judges can and should employ
that provision where appropriate and
issue orders detailing the reasonable
grounds for the continuance and Franklin
County Municipal Court has authorized
the use of recognizance bonds for
nonviolent misdemeanors and traffic
cases but there's still more work to be
done today I want to encourage local
courts to continue using their own
authority and initiative to address
common
issues that we see across the state for
example I urge all judges to grant
continuances or use alternate methods
for non-essential court appearances
ensure that the clerk's office remains
open and are accessible to the public
temporarily stay appropriate evictions
and foreclosure proceedings temporarily
refrain from issuing warrants for
failure to appear for traffic violations
minor misdemeanor and non violent
misdemeanor offenses find ways to
provide remote and yet meaningful
treatment options for those with
substance abuse disorder change
probation and community control and
pretrial supervision meetings to phone
or video reporting finally I urge judges
to use their discretion to release
people held in jail and release
incarcerated individuals who are in a
high-risk category for being infected
with the virus looking ahead we will be
working with the governor and the
General Assembly on a legislative
proposal which will provide more
uniformity and continuity in our
judicial systems response to emergencies
such as this I must also mention the
work of the Supreme Court staff itself
we continue to consider and decide cases
although we have taken common sense
measures consistent with the governor's
guidance to reduce risk the court
remains open
we have essential staff performing their
duties on and off-site we will continue
to accept case filings provide support
for judges for local court staff and for
attorneys finally I understand that many
local courts lack the technology and
resources needed to implement many of
these suggestions to meet that demand
the Supreme Court will release funds in
the form of grants to local courts to
obtain video conferencing equipment it
is my hope that by pushing out this
funding on an emergency basis we can
assist the local courts in a quick
implementation of video conferencing for
arraignments and other conferencing
needs I expect to announce the the
process for those grants tomorrow we've
decided on an amount
to four million dollars that will be
taken from my budget and dispersed to
the local courts for this purpose now
before I take your questions I'd like to
say that I have personally been in touch
with many judges the Bar Association's
leadership and in constant conversation
with the director of the Ohio Judicial
Conference Paul Piper we are working
together in this ever-changing
environment and we are so pleased to
continue to do so thank you
now we'll take any questions that you
might have kevin landers WB NS 10 T V
can you explain a little bit more about
releasing prisoners who are in the
high-risk category of attracting the
virus
thank you but there obviously are many
different ages and health conditions of
prisoners in our jails and an assessment
should be done to determine whether or
not they can safely be released given
the fact of their age and maybe other
health conditions that they might have
that they have to deal with this is
twofold
one to safeguard the the folks that are
are in jail and also to offer the
individual who may be at risk the
opportunity to be isolated outside of
the jail environment this is up to the
local courts to do this is and in
conjunction obviously with the sheriff's
who run the jails but this is something
that I've asked them to consider I've
just this is Molly Martinez with
spectrum news I'm wondering if there's
any push to sort of clear out low-level
offenders and sort of make more room in
the prisons during this pandemic well I
don't speak for the prisons I'm talking
about the jail's when I make this
recommendation there be any leniency
with the jails and who is incarcerated
well that's what I mentioned that the
judges should review their bail and the
in the circumstances by which they have
people detained in the jails and
prioritize releases based on that thank
you chief Jim province with the Toledo
Blade there were two justices who have
recused themselves from the Election Day
lawsuit could you tell us
how you're going to replace them in
considering this case and if you can
kids you comment on the fact that you
yourself are being sued over your
Election Day morning decision well first
of all I'm not going to comment on
pending cases I will tell you in general
when cases are not orally argued there
is no need for a visiting judge to sit
on a case we need four justices to
create a majority as you well know and
as long as we have four justices that
are in unison there's no need to deal
with the fact that we don't have four
justices if we did have a problem with
four justices that would be an agreement
then there would be a need to supplement
with visiting judges but not at this
time thank you
I chief I Andrew Welsh Huggins with The
Associated Press in terms of the
recommendations that you've made that
you'd like to see judges and courts
undertake
can you explain whether you have the
ability to ramp that up at all and and
make an actual judicial order and
depending on your answer to that is
that's something that you would take
advantage of in other words instead of
making recommendations certainly do you
have any way to issue a directive an
order to judges to actually do these
things thanks for that question
you know there's two different types of
judicial systems in the 50 states that
we have in our country one it's called a
unified system and one is what we have
here in Ohio which is a non unified
system in the unified systems the the
Supreme Court the Chief Justice has that
type of power that you just described
and can issue directives not just for
emergency situations but many other
situations that present themselves in
the course of managing you know the
judicial system in the state we don't
have that in Ohio we have
superintendents rule 14 which is a
declaration of a judicial emergency this
does not go as far as what you were
suggesting that there would be an a
pronouncement from the Chief Justice
that would be binding on all judges at
least that's my interpretation
of rule 14 at this time when I mentioned
that we are looking at legislation
that's exactly what we're looking at to
create legislation that would under very
very limited and specialized
circumstances such as what we are
experiencing here should there be a need
the opportunity for the Chief Justice to
make those type of orders that would be
binding on the judiciary real quickly
the legislature is actually meeting next
week are you looking at a fixed that
quickly when you're talking about that
type of legislation in an ideal world
that's the way it would happen but we're
not in an ideal world so we'll see
thanks hey Chief Justice this is Jake
Zuckerman from the howl Capital Journal
I wouldn't ask about your decision
against any moratorium on evictions is
it prudent to allow the eviction process
to continue in this pandemic would you
repeat your question please I thought I
heard you say that there was no
moratorium on evictions could you
clarify that for one and is it prudent
to continue to allow the infection
process to continue in this pandemic
well that's an interesting question most
people think that evictions are just for
mere non-payment of your rent or
whatever the situation but there are
certain types of evictions that may be
for example domestic violence and trying
to get someone evicted from the home
because they present a danger to the
other members the living in that home so
it's up to the courts to be to deal with
that and to figure out yes if there is
an eviction that is in process or going
to they could have a moratorium on
filing of evictions and foreclosures in
the same way they can do that but then
again they have to have the flexibility
that if someone needs to be removed
through the eviction process because
they're a domestic violence perpetrator
that should be allowable on a local
courts judgment and and their initiative
so you know Ohio has 88 different
counties over 700 judges over 350 courts
in this state and we are not as I said a
unified state but the
the reason I think maybe for that it's
because we have such a such a variety of
communities and court systems and
resources so I am in favor of the
solutions coming from the locals and
being implemented by the local courts
and local community leaders and and
officials of course and as a last resort
I would resort to you know the contents
of the legislation that I just described
now different mayor's in in the state
that I'm aware of have urged that
evictions be stayed that any utilities
be reinstated or the the process to you
know terminate be suspended and those
are those are good practices and those
are practices that I definitely would
urge thank you hello chief justice
Paulette easily with Hannah I'm told I'm
your last question today apparently
Hamilton County Judge heekin has asked
you to issue a uniform order a uniform
guidance in keeping with your power to
quote do all things necessary to ensure
the orderly and efficient administration
of justice and then related to that
can you speak to any equal protection
concerns for potential jurors or
witnesses in different counties under
varying code 19 orders to appear or not
appear in court okay would you repeat
what the judge from Hamilton County
would for what purpose oh you know based
on a cleveland.com article apparently
they're quoting him he is asking you to
issue a uniform order for all courts
based on your power quote to do all
things necessary to ensure the orderly
and efficient administration of justice
in other words that would be your legal
authority to do so now I know you've
addressed Ohio being non-uniform
I didn't hear you address that precise
phrase I don't know where it appears
right now and then the related question
again what equal protection concerns are
there for jurors and witnesses in
different counties under different coab
at 19 orders
okay if there was a need if our local
judges and local leadership were not
addressing the issues that presented
themselves maybe I would have to take a
look at intervening in some way but
that's not the case that we have here
today there is you know as I said
there's orders you can take a look at
them on the website and you can see for
yourself the type of measures that are
being taken in the individuals courts
and there's many many many of these
measures that are taken in the courts to
address this and they address all kinds
of situations
primarily they're concerned about jury
pools which points to your second
question and not having jury trials
because of the health risk that that
imposes the fact that you may have
difficulty even having jurors report so
if the court employs the appropriate
statutory authority to continue cases
there's where your authority is and
that's how those those trials can be
continued yes and as the state's chief
legal mind is at work and you address
the equal protection question between
counties okay well I'm not going to
address an equal protection question
first of all there's not one before us
and secondly if there was I'd have to
consult with my colleagues because it
would be a case in front of us and I
don't speculate on cases either when
they're being filed or when they're
potentially so with that if there are no
other questions thank you very much
chief thank you very much I have a few
points I want to assure everyone and we
have talked to everybody that would know
about this at the grocery supply chain
is doing well so you don't have to think
that the food is going to run out in the
grocery store I know
people have been concerned and and
buying a number of items but it's things
are still moving forward selling bakery
is still going and all the all the
transportation is still going so
everything is is fine and that certainly
will all be a priority as we move
forward so next let me say that the
illegal internet cafes as of right now
we're closing them and even if you think
your internet cafe is legal it's closed
as well we receive complaints from local
officials that we have people gathering
there and so I just want to make that
very very clear and we are issuing in
order to to that effect in all
seriousness the concern is always the
same and it is number of people coming
coming together we've heard concerns
raised by local government officials and
questions in regard to can they conduct
their business remotely this is
something that the General Assembly will
take up next week I would suggest that
all the whole governments get ready to
do that obviously they need to comply
and make sure that the press is notified
make sure that not only is the press
notified that but they have access to
watch see what what what is going on
that's important that during this time
of crisis that the public confidence
remain strong but we also know that
gathering of people together is not
something that we would like to see so
the General Assembly will address this I
believe next week
let me call everyone's attention to a
directive from the PUC Oh came out last
week and I think in because of all the
other things that have been going on it
may not have been as widely reported as
possible so I want to emphasize this
again they have issued a moratorium in
regard to electric and gas disconnects
at least for the time being that runs
through May 1 I believe I'm sure that
that might be addressed in the future
but I'd want to make that clear I know
there's been concerns and some people
have asked me about that I also received
some requests and I know dr. Acton will
talk about this but the requests are
what do we tell families who are
thinking about going on their spring
break what do we tell people who are
already in their spring break and
they're coming back from Florida and
we'll start with those coming back in
Florida or anyplace else
we welcome you but the most prudent
thing to do and again dr. akan will
address this but the most prudent thing
to do if you've been traveling please
you know stay in your home please you
know make sure that you're not in
contact with people outside your family
lives lives in that home that is
certainly the most prudent thing we have
an example yesterday of someone who very
innocently came back from Spring Break
was in Florida and that did not end the
way we wanted to end so we would also
say that as far as anyone thinking about
traveling please reconsider that is it
is a high-risk proposition and we would
hope that you would not do that when I
got home last night I think one of the
first things Fran said to me was that
before I announce that people should be
getting thermometers I might want to
check and see if those thermometers are
available
is true and I've gotten also other calls
so we know that they're in very very
short supply but let me try to put that
in context really what we were trying to
what I was trying to say very inartfully
was that employers that continue to work
and we have essential industries that
absolutely must continue we would ask
them to be extremely careful with their
employees for the benefit of employees
the in benefit of everyone and so you
know doing the extra sanitation doing
all the things that you need to do
taking temperature was one suggestion
but I know that thermometers are hard to
get but you know you would be a good
idea for example ask your employees did
you take your temperature at home for
those who do have one and you know ask
about how well the employees are feeling
clean disinfect and again what we say
all the time is just separation try try
to observe in the workplace the same
separation that we're trying to observe
every everywhere else again it comes
back to small small decisions that each
one of us makes every single day is
going to determine how well we do and
whether our health care system actually
can hold up under what is is coming
ahead every day I get rumors and I get
texts and emails and calls so let me do
my daily National Guard rumor put down
the National Guard is not involved in
carrying weapons you may see them
carrying groceries they're helping at
food bank and so you're going to see the
guard involved in transport you're going
to see them involved in doing things
that they can do with their equipment
when there is any change in that if
there is any change in that we certainly
will let everyone know
so again want to make sure everyone
understands again rumors about martial
law
quarantine everyone in their home none
of those none of those are true and
again as governor I think it's important
that I kind of put that down I've been
made aware that there's scam artists and
its most despicable thing every time
there's a crisis every time there's
something tough that goes on after a
tornado for example there's always scam
artists there's always someone trying to
rip somebody off small number of people
many of them I'm sure they're on the
internet they don't even live in Ohio
may not even live we don't know where
they live but someone's on the internet
trying to get your personal data do not
give them your personal data it's
basically that are same basic rules that
we we have had in the in the past I'm
now going to introduce several members
of our cabinet let me start with marine
Corcoran marine is our director of
Medicaid I picked her for her expertise
in this area long have long
long-standing
she's been really a incredibly
compassionate dedicated to public
servant for over 30 years
focus on some of the most vulnerable
populations that we have first new runs
the Medicaid Department runs a very very
significant department she has a nursing
degree in MBA as well from Case Western
after nursing school she moved to
Cleveland and has lived in Ohio since
that time marine get my stuff out of
your way Murray
Thank You governor
this governor said my name is Maureen
Corcoran I'm the director of the Ohio
Department of Medicaid Medicaid is a
health care program that serves about 3
million Ohioans about 1.2 million of
whom are children and that includes more
than 210,000 Ohioans who are over 65
years old
we support and care for oh hi Owens in
all manners of health care environment
and community environments including
60,000 older Ohioans who are served in
home and community-based services in
their home more than 41,000 Ohioans with
developmental disabilities who are
served also in the community as well as
more than 50,000 Ohioans who are served
in Ohio's nursing facilities you've
heard the governor and dr. Acton say in
recent weeks that dr. Acton is the
doctor for Ohio she takes care of our
the public health of all Ohioans and as
a nurse I feel like I share that
responsibility to care for all Ohioans
even though I have a responsibility for
just a small number of those Ohioans
today the governor is issuing an
executive order that will authorize
emergency rules that will expand
dramatically expand access to medical
and behavioral health services using
telehealth I want to talk to you a
little bit about what that means and why
that's important so telehealth services
includes not only fancy video capacity
that we know we have in some of our
wonderful healthcare facilities and
practitioners but it also includes
simple things like telephone calls
landlines FaceTime and the use of simple
smart phones today we're expanding the
ability to access medicaid services
all of those venues so that you or the
patients that you serve can be cared for
or can contact you from their home to
not have to come out to your office not
have to go to the emergency room and not
have to go to the hospital because of
concerns with their health to be served
by telehealth or to be served in this
manner the individuals do not
necessarily have to have an existing
relationship with a doctor they don't
have to be an established patient so if
you are an individual and you haven't
been signed up or aren't cared for with
a primary care doctor you can do that
now and you can do it from your home and
in these simple manners and be able to
get the kind of consultation or
reassurance that you need we've we've
further expanded it so that there are no
limitations on practitioners or sites
where a patient can be consulted it
includes professional physician groups
federally qualified health centers rural
health centers ambulatory health clinics
hospitals emergency rooms and other say
community behavioral health centers and
just to give you a sense it's not
limited to just physicians and advanced
practice professionals it includes
certainly physicians psychologists
physician assistants clinical nurse
specialists licensed independent social
workers licensed chemical dependency
counselors other kinds of supervised
practitioners audiologists occupational
therapists physical therapists speech
and language therapists and
practitioners who serve our children
through our Medicaid school program as
well as dietitians and other providers
that we might need to designate as we go
forward the kinds of services that are
available through this mechanism include
a virtual check-in with your physician
or with other of the qualified health
professionals that I mentioned
remote evaluation of a recorded video or
an image of something on your body that
you want your practitioner to look at
for example online digital evaluation
and management services remote
monitoring of physiologic parameters
such as heart rate electrocardiograph
readings things like that that your
practitioner can check even again
remotely and through these mechanisms
certain occupational therapy physical
therapy speech language and some of
these other therapies as well as medical
nutrition provided by a dietitian in
addition to these physical or healthcare
services behavioral health is another
very important component of this that
the governor and director Chris have
talked about in recent days the
Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services is coordinating with
us to implement a similar expanded array
of services and providers throughout our
community behavioral health services
across the state and that includes
things like treatment counseling crisis
services in-home behavioral therapy for
children psychosocial rehab peer
recovery and other kinds of affiliated
services now before I leave I want to
take take us back to the basics for just
a moment enabling this full array of
services both medical and behavioral
health to be done remotely or through
phone or video is an important way for
us to take pressure off of emergency
rooms and hospitals while allowing
Ohioans to be able to continue to
receive good quality care and to not
have to even leave their home to do that
we also know that there's difficulty
with access in certain remote areas of
the state and so this is a perfect time
for us to be able to make new and better
inroads to providing services in those
areas of the state and most importantly
it allows us to protect families and
health and behavioral healthcare
tsch iners from contracting or spreading
the virus now while these are important
rules as it relates to Medicaid and
community behavioral health funding this
is important to everyone the governor
has been communicating with other
insurance companies and community
providers across the state and from my
conversations with them private
insurance companies are even also
following in this path they're taking
our lead and beginning to also expand
telehealth services in other ways so
it's not just limited to our service so
it is very helpful with this kovat
crisis in fact it's a necessity but as
they say necessity is the mother of
invention so I would offer to you today
that this is not only helpful in our
crisis but it is also a way for us in
our health care system to leapfrog
forward to take advantage of the crisis
and begin to provide health care in a
different way that will be satisfying
and more accessible and reachable to
many Ohioans finally I want to thank the
Ohio professional boards who worked with
us counseling and Social Work
marriage and family therapists board the
speech and hearing board the Medical
Board the PT and ot boards who worked to
revise and look at their requirements so
that all these requirements would align
and practitioners would then be able to
take full advantage of the flexibility
and we're also very pleased to have the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services and other federal agencies who
similarly are making changes in their
policies that are enabling us to do this
in a much broader and widespread way so
with that I am pleased at while we're
all dealing with the the events
associated with this crisis it is still
very important that people continue to
be in touch with their primary care
doctor and this is a new way
a new opportunity both for practitioners
and for consumers that we hope you'll
feel you can take advantage of Rochelle
McElroy is my director of the Department
of Aging very important department she
worked for me in the attorney general's
office for a number of years where she
ran our elder justice unit
she has over 25 years of local and state
experience in the aging as well as youth
services area and she is from the
Mahoning Valley she is from Youngstown
ok Thank You governor and thank you to
my as director of Ohio's state unit on
Aging I have the opportunity to
represent 2.8 million older Ohioans in
the state and for those of you who may
not be aware we have the sixth largest
older adult population within the nation
and within our department we have
responsibility for many programs
policies and services that impact older
Ohioans
and we've been focused on older adults
since this kovat 19 occurrence has hit
our state in fact we've been watching it
we've been paying attention and we've
been really locked in and there's been a
lot of attention on older adults because
we know they are one of the very
high-risk populations during this time
much of our discussion has been around
our nursing facilities but what I'd like
to do is just give you a really quick
snapshot of what this means the impact
of Cova at 19 for older adults across
the state both within our facilities as
well as within our communities as I
mentioned nursing homes received a lot
of attention first because we know that
older adults are at risk and because we
know that this is a congregate site what
we also know about our nursing homes is
that they train for this type of
situation every day they know how to
apply precautions and prevention
and they know how to bring calm and they
know how to face these really tough
decisions and our job throughout this
time has been to listen to them and
learn what we can do to help them and
support them help them in this very fast
approaching and fast moving occurrence
with Cova at 19 in the nursing
facilities we have helped by providing
guidance we saw we've also moved through
the continuum and we've limited and
restricted visitation in our nursing
homes and long-term care facilities we
also helped by monitoring the
consistency of the delivery of needed
supplies of the facilities and tracking
the available workforce to ensure the
residents are able to get the care that
they need and we've also formed a
special team focusing on Cova at 19 and
how we will respond within our nursing
facilities we also have on our continuum
that we're keeping our eyes on our
senior congregate housing settings we
have tens of thousands of older adults
in congregate settings many of them
residing in our affordable housing
communities many of them live
independently but they're only able to
do so with the help of different service
providers and we are strategizing now to
see how we can continue to provide
services within these settings while
minimizing those opportunities for
congregation other vital services that
we need to have discussion about and for
people to have full appreciation on in
terms of the decisions that we have to
make our senior centers in our Adult Day
centers these service central hubs for
many people to receive support meals in
some cases really basic supervision but
these are also sites where people have
to congregate and so I would say to
individuals that are using these sites
their families that are using these
sites we recognize the importance of
them and how they they provide a very
necessary service for your loved ones
but I would encourage you to begin to
think of alternative ways that we can
provide these services for them within
our department what we are doing is look
how we can begin to transfer those meals
that people get in congregate sites to
now home deliberate meals and other
options for people so they don't have to
concern themselves a worry that they
will not have a meal and we are so now
moving at a really rapid pace of making
some really important decisions on
essential services because what we have
to appreciate is as many people who
typically congregate now will be at home
we now have to find a way to be able to
provide those services to meet those
needs in home settings and so meals we
believe that there will be an
exponential need for home delivered
meals we also know that we will have
needs in terms of essential services
such as personal care those services
were people help individuals with basic
needs such as changing them helping them
to get up helping them to bathe when
they need it in some cases feeding
individuals and so we have to be
prepared both within our facilities but
also outside of our facilities so that
we can provide people with the very
basic things that they need and with
that some of the decisions that we have
to make some of the things that we have
to contemplate you know are the services
that we can offer but also being able to
provide the support for the workforce
that will be needed to provide these
very critical and basic things for these
families I would like to say that as we
continue to contemplate these things as
we continue to work with our sister
agencies to help us through these I
think pretty challenging times but times
that we know that we can make it through
we are very energized by the local
communities and and I'm also very
energized and I think it's important for
you to know and understand that the
aging Network is a very sophisticated
and a very well operating and mature
Network and while we will be challenged
to do this we know that we are
absolutely up to the task we will have
to call upon the support of others we
will ask for support from our
partners are state partners and our
local partners and so if you're
wondering what can you do right now I'm
gonna leave you with a cup with what yes
I'm going to give you a plug on what I
need from you right so that we can all
get through this together one thing you
know we've heard a lot about distancing
and I heard dr. act and my colleagues
say the other day that it's really
important for us to talk more about
physical distancing not social distance
II so call someone up use video calling
if you can but check on your older loved
ones or your neighbors it is so
critically important at this time ask
them how they're feeling if are they
eating do they have the things that they
need offer to go to the store for them
and run errands for them if you're able
to do so if you're able to pick up
medication for them please do so if you
have things that can help them in terms
of entertainment I would ask you to
provide them with those things and if
you must visit them if you must
certainly you I would ask that we use
our basic basic basic common sense we
wash our hands we check ahead and and we
make really smart decisions before we
make a decision to enter into someone's
home if you have questions always always
go to the website with Komodo virus Ohio
gov and in your local communities I
would also say that we have frontline
support through our area agency on aging
network every County can access one
through our regional network of Aging
offices but just know that you have a
very strong Network here in Ohio you
have a very dedicated network in Ohio
and we have already made great strides
in being able to do business a little
differently so that we can take care of
the individuals both within the
facilities and those also outside of the
facilities Thank You governor
you good afternoon everyone and thank
you
it's my colleagues who just do amazing
work every day even before this weekend
it's just such an honor to work with
them today I'll start with our numbers
as of this afternoon we do have 119
confirmed cases with an illness onset
range of February 7th to March 18th and
our males and females females are at
forty three of those cases and seventy
six males hospitalizations our 33 and I
have to say you know health care system
is very top of mind for me right now
we have 24 counties accounted for on
that list so that list is growing as
well I want to thank everyone who's
heeding the urgent call by our governor
and our lieutenant governor and
following everything that we have asked
we know this is a difficult time but as
dr. Collins recently said from the NIH
we are definitely on the upslope now and
it is urgent for those of you and we all
know some folks and our families or
people in our communities try to talk to
each other it is time to heed this call
you need to stay home if you can it all
stay home with your family you need to
follow the guidance that we have
provided and take it seriously so that
we can protect our essential workers
every day matters and as news will be
breaking over the next 24 hours I think
that will become increasingly clear you
know we've heard in the media about a
childcare center we have heard now about
a nursing home you're seeing what is
that community spread on the upward
sweep so every day and every one of us
I know it's a lag time for each of us
and understanding this and it's kind of
a two steps forward one step back and it
happens even amongst our own team that
getting your head around this is hard
each of us hears at a different time I
director McElroy shared with me her son
Darian who is 26 like one of my sons and
didn't matter what she said but then
Kevin Durant Durant is ill and it all
set in the light bulb went off and
that's it's for real you get real when
that moment happens if something jars it
for you but you go two steps forward and
then you're like me driving to work
going this isn't real but where all the
cars and it just goes like this I don't
care if you're leaders whether you're
mayors whether we're citizens we all get
this and we kind of get it and then we
forget and I'm asking folks to really
heed the message now because time is of
the essence
Spring Break that's a question many have
asked about you know come home for those
of you have been out young people take
this seriously as dr. Burke told us at
the presidential address today young
people are turning out from the data we
have to be equally affected and
hospitalized in large amounts in Europe
the United States over 38 percent of
hospitalizations are now under the age
of 55 our average age of onset so that's
skewed from our two-year-old to our 91
year-old is 49 years and young people
are getting ill so you have to take this
seriously and you have to help us not
spread this virus for the rest of us
there are a couple other things I want
you to think about first of all there is
a lot of misinformation out there it's
vital that you go to our website and use
trusted sources of information
coronavirus
Ohio gov you there are a lot of scams
out there the Attorney General mentioned
them today so please pay attention to
that and never give your information
stigma is something that is also on my
mind it's been on my mind since the
beginning remember that this virus began
as a zoonotic disease going from amyl to
human in China that can happen anywhere
viruses do not discriminate they love us
all equally and we have to really think
about this I've heard of things being
said that are just not true and we all
have to take this seriously to not
spread that sort of misinformation but
also I don't want people to feel the
stigma of getting help we now know the
unemployment numbers our lieutenant
governor will talk more and more about
this in the days to come and all that we
are doing for vulnerable populations
like the homeless and others but also
for all of us
Matt Habash of the Mid Ohio food
collective said on a show last night
he's been in this field forever
we cannot just like Pearl Harbor or post
any war we cannot feel badly if we need
help right now
there is help our philanthropies are
nonprofits are coming to the table they
are doing this but all of us should not
feel any sense of team of getting a
little help or helping each other out as
neighbors there are everyday heroes
everywhere we know that not all heroes
were capes
you're going to hear more stories about
ordinary people doing extraordinary
things one of the things that you can do
now is donate blood if you are healthy
you can go to Red Cross blood org we'll
have that on our coronavirus website
Red Cross blood org or sometimes if it's
not Red Cross in your community it's
your local Blood Center that blood will
be needed you don't go in you're sick
viruses aren't transmitted that way so
we will need the blood supply and that
something else folks can do we need to
have some grace with this I constantly
say that we're going to get this about
right this is a moving train that's
moving very quickly we cannot linger on
things like do we have enough tests or
don't we at this point is the time for
action and I need everyone to focus on
following what the governor says and
staying home and taking these actions as
we go up on this curve asking for grace
even me I know people are saying I'm so
nice I have a little fierceness in me we
should just admit it
I even lose my temper as my kids and
family will tell you when pushed far
enough and we're all asking for grace
with each other in this time we have got
to keep planting that flag my job is to
keep pushing us forward and I'm putting
that stake in the ground and we're
moving us forward and we're all kind of
lagging and it's going to be a little
messy
when venting systems that never existed
before as we go we're inventing
solutions we're inventing new swab
techniques
we're gonna keep inventing in Ohio and
we're gonna keep moving that flag
forward and the rest of us will follow
as best we can but now is the time -
he'd put that flag out everyone I
thought that was the most wonderful
suggestion by Fran DeWine our first lady
I asked my husband to put ours out and
it'll be a little symbol to all of us of
what we're doing thank you Thank You
governor
dr. Acton another great job as we were
discussing yesterday kind of we always
think of ways to explain things and kind
of said if you love someone
step away yeah we're not gonna sing it
we're not gonna sing it I governor asked
me to sit in on a call with the
president and vice president and some of
the nation's governors and lieutenant
governor's as we were getting a briefing
they did commit that there are working
with the private sector and with some
federal regulations being rolled back a
new supply of masks tests and
ventilators so there
working hard to get those things
although reiterating what dr. act and
said let's don't get caught up on the
test piece let's let's focus on on
getting healthy and getting treatment
and and and all of the things that she
has been asking of us the one one update
we did Ohio did apply with the US Small
Business Administration for a request to
allow small businesses and
not-for-profits in Ohio to apply for
low-interest long-term loans of up to
two million dollars through the SBA
economic injury disaster loan program
that request has been approved it has
been approved this the loans may be used
by Ohio small businesses and
not-for-profits to pay for fixed debts
payroll accounts payable and other bills
that can't be paid for due to the
disaster impact loan applications can be
completed online at disaster loan
sba.gov slash ela disaster loan dot
sba.gov slash e la or by calling 1-800
659 to nine five five one eight hundred
six five nine two nine five five and
they urge you that you use though the
online portal is that will help the
process move more quickly i know that
the congressional delegation and the US
Senate passed the families first
coronavirus respond that spawn sack last
night the president signed it
senator Portman forwarded a couple of
highlights that he want to make sure
that people know that it will include
free coronavirus testing for those who
are ill improves access to paid sick
leave and paid family leave provides
additional food assistance to those who
need it enhances on
employment insurance and I know Maureen
Corcoran is very pleased about one piece
in there that we asked for in our letter
to the president for a better a better
federal share of F map funding which
will help us cope with the added costs
of committing our services our vital
services to the corona virus pandemic
also included in this was the approval
of the snap waivers that were requested
for food assistance additionally on
unemployment
remember unemployment dot Ohio gov is
the place that you can apply we have had
through Monday or since Monday we've had
an additional one hundred and eleven
thousand claims through Wednesday so I'm
happy report while other states systems
have crashed I want to commend the team
our our tech team and our folks at OD
JFS for running a system where that has
not happened in Ohio we'll keep our
fingers crossed that it doesn't but
that's incredibly important I know on
occasion there have been some drop calls
the system is pretty overwhelmed but but
appreciate everybody's effort there I
know that the governor touched on this
earlier about the supply chain I was in
discussions with grocery stores this
morning they wanted to emphasize that
the supply chain is intact they are
producing just as much bread and rice
and everything is they always have in
some cases even more of these of the
things that people want but because of
the excess demand that's why you don't
see it on the shelves it's not that the
supply chain is district been disrupted
in any way it's that they can only go so
fast and if we crowd the stores then we
create the problem for everybody else
but they you know we do want to we
wouldn't want to emphasize something
about all the businesses that are open
most of the businesses are open frankly
are open because they need to be and we
ask every business that is open
to care about your employees you have to
care about them they are a vital link to
the supply chain they're a vital link to
the services that people are counting on
do everything that you can to make that
workplace as healthy as you can possibly
make it
to that critical workforce the people
that are working in our grocery stores
and doing the things thank you
you you are you are part of the hero
story of this you are you are doing
things that the rest of society counts
on so for the entire workforce out there
who is doing what we need to get through
a difficult time we thank you and to the
public please respect them we're all
going through a difficult time but these
workers at the grocery stores at the
drugstores at the places that you might
frequent out a need give them personal
space give them their six-feet help make
sure that you're protecting them and
you're protecting yourself this is super
important that we do this we're all in
this together as we say time and time
again and whereas we're out there as
citizens please make sure you're doing
that was on a call today with several of
the the CEOs of the banks across the
state they asked me to emphasize to you
stay calm
the banking system is well your banks
and credit unions are going to be there
for you they said that you can count on
them they are part of the critical
infrastructure that we know we have to
keep in place and some of these banks
credit unions and lenders have already
started voluntary programs on deferrals
for cars mortgages credit cards call
them ask them if they have something
like this available for you if you're in
need they are they recognize that they
have a responsibility in the system and
they're all taking it very seriously on
Elections Secretary LaRose asked me to
emphasize this that the solution that he
is seeking is not a new election he's
seeking to just merely extend the voting
period
out of a matter of safety and health
benefit to the population to June the
second so that means if you already
absentee voted or you voted early you're
not going to need to do it again this is
about extending that opportunity to the
people who have not had that chance yet
and we know that the the courts and the
legislature are going to work with
Senator little Rose to make sure that
that happens for employers on job
training we have at workforce Ohio gov a
list of a variety of ways that you can
up skill during this during this time
when we come out of this the digital
economy will be even more powerful than
it is now and and having tech skills are
going to be really really important this
is a time to upskill yourself to use
those for employers use them for
citizens these services are available
workforce at Ohio gov and I know on the
the at lieutenant gov Husted Twitter
site and an at gov Mike DeWine Twitter
site we're going to put all those links
up there for you so you can check that
but it's at workforce dot Ohio dot gov
another thing I have received some calls
over the the past few days and says well
what about this what about that when are
you going to give us a heads up that
this is coming and you get the heads up
when we know it's coming when the guys
standing behind me tells you he he tells
you as soon as we know this is a process
for that's as transparent and open as we
can possibly make it that Governor
DeWine doesn't make a decision and then
you know wait a day to tell you as soon
as he he knows what we're doing and he's
gotten what he needs from his team he
tells you and so know that you are
getting the information as quickly as we
can get it to you and appreciate the
great work like I said that the the
people out there and the workforce are
doing to help keep our businesses and
our vital services alive everybody stay
safe
and we will carry on thank you just to
follow up with John before we get to you
Jim I also want to thank all our workers
who are out there making a difference
every single day this is the feast of
st. Joseph there's the patron saint of
workers we thank you
we thank you very much for what you're
doing every single day to defeat us to
clothe us to take care of us medical the
police on and on so thank you very much
Jim Jim Aune whio TV this is a question
for dr. Acton if you've seen the news
broadcast the pictures the video of all
those kids on beaches in Florida first
your reactions secondly knowing that
they are going to return to Ohio what is
your prescription for them and their
families what should we be doing to keep
us safe when they return here that's
right so the first thing you know I have
three children of my own and three
children we have an extended family and
so the first thing I'm hoping it's not
my children so I know how you're feeling
parents and and and we know that this is
sinking in slowly
we have travelers coming back we've had
over 355 travelers at this point from
other countries we have the same advice
and it's on our website about returning
but what I need them to do is monitor
self monitors the official term and that
means to watch for the symptoms of
coronavirus or Kovan 19 I want them to
be checking their temperature seeing if
they have a cough a fever any of the
symptoms I need them to stay home
because I need all of you to stay home
if you if you absolutely can
if they do start to have some of the
symptoms I need them to talk to their
primary care doctor and now potentially
through telemedicine but to let someone
know and they'll walk them through a
history and you can include that travel
but the fact is community spread is all
over our country
I'd really rather them not being close
together and that's what's wrong with
the beach I want people you know they're
gonna be people who go on that maybe
have a beach place or something and if
they're there with their immediate
family because I'm talking about tribes
now not necessarily like your blood
relatives with that small group of
people less than ten that you know might
be in your immediate sphere that you're
kind of riding this out with you know if
they're out or you're out you know my
husband's a runner a longtime
cross-country coach teacher and you know
he and the boys might go for a run and
we'll be far apart we might go for a
hike you know if that there's ever a
pause here and so some of that's okay
but it's a crowdedness that not having
that physical distance and then mixing
it up of course and spreading amongst
all the localities doesn't help so come
home there are a lot of elderly folks
and people have been snowbirds coming
home as well I'm the same thing come
home and try not to expose other people
same advice thank you
thank you Kevin Landers tend to be I
have two questions one for the governor
one for dr. Acton you had talked earlier
today about dispelling rumors and there
are two reports today that a drug for
malaria may show promise for coronavirus
and secondly some people with type A
blood are considered to be more high
risk for coronavirus so I'd like you to
address those two issues and then for
the governor you know when you turn the
lights out at the end of the day do you
wonder if you've done enough for example
do you wish something you did today
should have been done a week ago and I
think for example we still have daycares
that are open and people are still
scratching their heads about why those
are still open thank you so I get the
easier one you know we will not have a
vaccine for a while as everyone knows
even though it's going at record amazing
science-fiction speeds but there is some
hope and there have been a lot of trials
all over the world of promising drugs
certainly the anti-malarials you've
heard with a combination of any
antibiotic
there are also some other antivirals as
I've mentioned before that are being
tested these are also in situations that
are unusual causes the FDA can waive
that a physician can waive compassionate
care guidelines that allows them to try
some things in unusual circumstances
last-ditch efforts so there's a lot of
that going on there is some study going
on of these antivirals and we'll all
like hope together that some of this
will work it'll give us more tools in
our tool belt that said where we are
right now in the epidemic curve the
curve I told you we are on the up sweep
and you know we need to follow these
same guidelines that's not going to
change for us and we have to focus
remember our testing is for the most
high risk right now hospital workers
frontline workers
talk to your doctor talk to they'll talk
to the hospital that might be able to do
that testing we're reserving that most
of us will stay at home but the 20% who
might need hospitalized we're using it
for that but again we'll go back and
we'll circle around right now we're
working on getting our hospitals ready
for what we know is coming and then I'll
let the governor speak and on the blood
you know what I haven't looked at that
yet so I will get back to you and I'll
have my team take a look at that every
night when I go to bed I think have we
done enough every morning when I get up
I think have we done enough all day long
I think have we done enough and that's
the question I asked my team every
single day and I asked myself 24 hours a
day as far as the daycare daycares and
we'll have more for you tomorrow
but many of the daycare numbers are
going down fairly dramatically people
have taken our advice and
used their own judgment and of taking
kids home we are now in the process of
determining how many of the kids who are
left there represent parents who are
vital to our health system vital to our
economy and those determinations are
being made but you're already seeing a
dramatic drop in the number of kids in
in daycare and we'll have more for you
tomorrow I will expand it your question
we are looking as their cell said the
director talked about adult daycare
talked about or congregate feeding those
are already in process again what we're
trying to determine is can we provide
people with what they need out of that
setting in regard to food and the
congregate feeding for or elderly that
is ongoing that is being moved away from
the congregate out into home delivery
for those local agencies that have
already done this and got it done thank
you thank you thank you you're making
those individuals safer and you're still
providing that food for those of you who
have not got it done please do it we
have to get this done we want to provide
the food but we also need to get them
away from that that danger of being with
so many other people in the area of
adult when we're talking about not the
feeding programs but the adult daycare
we have people there who are in have
very very different needs some have
various as herself said some very very
significant needs and so what we have to
make sure is before we kick them out
that those needs are going to be made
met every single day you also have the
issue
as we know what is coming to making sure
that a nurse let's say a single nurse
maybe have no one else in her home she's
got her mom takes care of her mom when
she's there mom has many many many
different needs during the day can't be
left alone so these are the calls that
we have to make we need that nurse but
we also obviously want to get the mom in
a particular setting so that she is not
as at risk to herself and to others so
the whole process is how we move people
out from here down to here but at the
same time don't abandon them and so it's
it's a working process but it's an
excellent question we'll have more for
you on that tomorrow thank you hi
governor Molly Martinez spectrum news
the governor of New York has suspended
all mortgage payments amid this crisis
is there any talk of doing that here in
Ohio we've certainly had discussions
about everything again these are items
possible items for the General Assembly
next week governor jim province with the
Toledo Blade the blade is reporting that
there is a presumptive coronavirus death
in Maumee want to know first of all is
this on your radar screen and how long
will it take before we know whether Ohio
has had its first death yes this is
something that is currently under
investigation and I am aware of it so I
will I will talk with everyone about
that and again we we need to let the
investigation at the local level our
disease detectives are doing a thorough
look into this to make that confirmation
it's as you said presumptive and when we
have more I'll tell you and I have to
say to everyone you know this is real
that's why we want you to take it
seriously we're seeing all the symptoms
the basic sense that were we're moving
up and this is accelerating we knew this
was going to happen we've always said we
know this and you know it's it's
heartbreaking every bit of this has been
heartbreaking for the people who have it
the people that are in the hospital and
I see use for people who you know are
wanting to advocate for their parents in
a home but can't visit them this is some
of the hardest stuff we're gonna face
and and so please you heed our guidance
how long would the investigation take
place I don't think it will take much
longer and I was notified of that a few
hours ago thank you
this is Jackie Borchert from the
Cincinnati Enquirer
I'm wondering how close do you feel we
are to a shelter-in-place order as port
reported today that the Illinois
governor is considering making such a
move in the coming days and some
communities there are doing their own
but also questioning whether that's
effective given it's not a statewide
mandate well first of all we've already
asked people to shelter in place if they
can that's a term other people use other
terms just to put it very bluntly stay
home he has people to stay home please
stay home if you can I talked to a
friend of mine today and he called me up
and and you want to see how I was doing
I said how are you doing and he says
parole we're sheltered at home he says
my wife and I are so many many Ohioans
are doing that we need more and more
Ohioans to do that but even so some of
this is just terminology if you get a
shelter-in-place order you're going to
still need police you're still going to
need fire you're still going to need
emergency you're still gonna need to eat
I mean we're going to need a lot of
different things that's going to
continue to on on in this state a state
of eleven point seven million people so
some of this is more terminology than
than anything else and we want people to
shelter in place we want them to stay
home and so again I will renew that plea
if there's no reason for you to be out I
mean a real good reason please stay home
and let me say something too we talked
about
the beaches and seen people on the beach
not all young people don't want to say
that but article today I read I'm sure
you saw it it looked at the number of
young people who are at in in ICU right
now people in their 20s people in their
30s so we should not think when we say
that it is more deadly the older you get
that does not mean that does not mean
that someone who gets this at a younger
age is going to have an easy time at all
we've got people who are reporting
literally it can I read from the ICU and
talking of talking about that so look
this despair is no one and again what I
said yesterday were we have it within
ourselves in making small decisions
seemingly small decisions to impact
human life we have within ourselves to
stop it from spreading from one human
being to the other it can't spread from
one to the other unless we help but do
that so let's stop helping it let's do
what we need to do is protect ourselves
and protect our families thank you hi
Governor Andrew Welsh Huggins with The
Associated Press I did just want to
chime in and thank you for these daily
briefings it's very helpful you hinted
at this a second ago with the item about
mortgage payments but with the
legislature coming back next week to
deal with coronavirus crisis I was
wondering as as specific as you're able
could you provide maybe your top three
or four wish list for what you would
like the legislature to accomplish
related to the crisis next week if at
all possible well we're gonna we'll give
you that list shortly we don't I don't
have it right now but look some of this
is you know emergency power or that we
simply do not have that our lawyers tell
you tell us we do not have I don't think
any of this is going to be a if you if
you look I had the opportunity yesterday
to talk with with the speaker we're also
talking
we sent a president we're making this
list available to the minority leaders
so
we will share that with you shortly add
something about the mortgage question
most mortgages are regulated federally
in the Federal Housing Finance Authority
yesterday set a moratorium I believe
it's 60 days for foreclosures and up to
12 months of forbearance so moves to the
mortgage stuff at the federal level is
already underway and we believe that
that that isn't that conversations are
moving in the right direction thank you
this has been Garber from ABC 6 and Fox
28 my question is for lieutenant
governor Husted first you mentioned that
you spoke with the president vice
president and ventilators any sense for
how many more of those Ohioans might be
able to get and also with unemployment
benefits we've had a lot of questions
from viewers confused about who might be
eligible how soon those rules might be
changed how much money they might be
able to get now that they're out of work
can you clarify a little bit about
exactly what this might look like moving
forward okay
people that are eligible for
unemployment are full-time workers that
were recently relieved of their duties
and needed assistance as a result the
coronavirus or whatever a reason it
might be your business shut down they
can apply an unemployment that Ohio gov
usually you have to wait a week you will
not have to wait a week to be eligible
we are looking at how we might address
part-time employees because the limit
right now the limit is is that you have
to work at least 20 hours a week and
make I believe it's or you have to have
worked 20 weeks and made up to $265 a
week we're looking at those limitations
to see if we might find a way to
accommodate that we're also asking the
federal government to help us with 1099
employees or 1099 filers which aren't
aren't employees but are in the work
force and it would not be eligible for
unemployment under the traditional
system so
that and if you're an employer who leave
somebody meaning that somebody you don't
have a paid leave program but this
person is exhibiting signs of
coronavirus and you want them out of the
workplace for your safety and theirs
they also would be eligible for this the
federal the federal programs that I
talked about earlier that were passed in
the in the legislation that the Senate
approved and president Trump signed
today we we are we're gonna get the
rules on that as soon as we can
most of that will be administered
through the Ohio Department of Job and
Family Services as soon as we have that
information we will provide it for you
on on additional ways people can access
those those services the the big piece
on on the the president's briefing that
he provided was that there is a a waiver
and I believe it's m95 masks is that
correct n95 masks who that are that
they're going to make many of those most
of those are not used for surgical grade
they're they're industrial grade but
they've had a waiver to make sure that
those that there's no liability as it
relates to those and and that will bring
you know a I can't recall off the top of
my head but I it's a substantial number
into the system that that we're not
there before
yeah from the construction industry and
things like that so that will bring a
lot of new masks and a PPE equipment on
the scene the private sector Roche
Abbott Labs and others have introduced
the president was announcing that
they're introduced testing kits that
they're going to try to get out to
people across the country as fast as
they can and and we just got a briefing
on that it's happening I'm sure that
they have a release on the details of
what those numbers are image of
ventilators as well manure they had a
whole process that they were talking
about with ventilators I would encourage
you to address that with with the
administration briefing numbers they
have a release out on all that thank you
Adrienne Robbins NBC for my questions
for Governor DeWine this it comes from
our sister station in Cincinnati
they're wondering have you thought at
all about closing some of the campuses
the large campuses like the IRS down in
Cincinnati where thousands of employees
are continuing to work work we continue
to look at different places different
opportunities to reduce where people are
coming together again whether it's the
IRS or whoever it is we're asking them
to observe all the safety measures we
don't want any employee of the IRS or
any place else to be walking into a
situation that it's not not good any of
their workers who can work from home we
would certainly ask the federal
government doing what we ask everybody
else to do which is to let them work
from home Laura Hancock from Cleveland
comm I just have a question about
resources at the Department of Health
you guys have discussed young people at
the beach but we really don't know how
many of these 19 119 people who are sick
are in their 20s or 30s 40s so on so we
what is your ability to do that are you
guys just stretched for resources Laura
we're putting out the demographic and
detailed numbers as absolutely fast as
we can as you can imagine we're taking
in quite a plethora of information we
still give that information at the
county level local health department's
of which we have 113 are really leading
the way in the press releases now there
are certain things that they'll be
coming to you with first and we'll be
receiving that but we are receiving data
now from private labs and hospital labs
and our own labs so some of that just
takes a while to compile thank you thank
you one of those lines we have roughly
six hospitals in Ohio that are testing
and Cleveland Clinic and you age can do
at least 600 maybe a thousand now a day
do we have any like when I look at the
National
testing situation in different states
Ohio's got a lot of a lot of testing
compared to smaller states but I don't
know what's our rate of testing do we
know you know we have maximized the
testing capacity that we have been given
as you know and we're very blessed to
have some pretty amazing healthcare
systems and and we did stand up our what
is being called drive through it sounds
erroneous but we had with a doctor's
order testing as you know there has been
a lack of swabs and some of the media
that is actually in the vial that you
put it in so so even though we had
tremendous capability to test we didn't
have all that we're making Corrections
every day I'll reiterate this one more
time I think it might be helpful and I'm
gonna try to put this on our website for
four we're talking about testing right
now and saving our testing capability
for those highest risk folks that will
be our hospital and health care workers
are hospitalized patients and those high
risk patients that are new that 20% that
are gonna be really surging any second
now on our hospitals so we we're doing
that because we need to protect and know
who we need to where our limited PPE
with and use that wisely and then also
those frontline responders so the
firefighters and the police and the EMS
and and that's how we're gonna triage
that we'll have that on our website
remember folks at home because I know
this is scary and I've had to ask even a
mayor please but you know we can talk
about what we have we have to fight the
war we have with what we have and we
will go back forward and so we if your
home and your doctor knows and does a
history with you and tells you ride this
out at home
there's no difference in what they're
going to tell you to treat it whether
you were tested or not even if you are
tested you might test negative because
you're too early in your illness so the
lack of testing is not gonna stop us
from treating you well and treating your
symptoms well so as I always say we will
tell you everything we know as we know
it please go to our website listen to
your provider and we will be mapping out
our hospitals or capability as we gather
that we're going to be hearing more and
more in the days to come about a
hospital capacity
quite honestly we're inventing some
amazing things as we go and and and and
therefore we'll share it with you Laura
as you know we became as transparent as
we are in a weird way I owe you a thanks
because saying that I was not being
transparent which I was like oh every
one of my family has to say stop saying
so much so you know but because of that
you know it really led to our this
commitment we've made and we will honor
that thank you
well thank you for these briefings
thanks hi Laura Bischoff Dayton Daily
News this is a question for dr. Acton I
was reading that Imperial College study
last night on non pharmacological
interventions superfund reading you know
it talks about this home isolation and
and social distancing interventions that
they need to be maintained until a
vaccine is available maybe which could
be as long as 18 months can you give us
a realistic timeframe of you know how
long do you think Ohio is going to be in
a situation that we're in so you know I
think everyone definitely you know if
you're following the news at all you
know we need to realize that this is a
long haul but I think we have to take it
as it comes because so much will evolve
if some of these drugs that we're
testing make a difference that will be a
new tool in our tool chest so you're
gonna see us take the best science which
is the non pharmacologic interventions
those four things I mentioned before the
early targeted layered interventions
rewind back to one of these earlier
press conferences - to learn more about
that that's what we're deploying right
now but that will
and on so many different factors the
other thing and you're gonna watch China
go through this right now how do you
exit that like how do you peel back
those layers without creating a surge of
infection and I beg you know we have a
lot of ideas I've been talking to a lot
of scientists I'd love to be a part of
conversations because I'm sure they're
going on all over the world right now
but I think as our testing this is where
our testing when it ramps up will be
invaluable because what we need to do is
do sort of a monitoring a health
monitoring of our whole population and
there will be tests that can look back
at blood so there are a lot of
innovations again this is an
unprecedented situation and so there
will be some strategies that are gonna
help us walk out of this time period so
stay tuned on that you know I know when
you hear words like 18 months that it
just adds a layer of just impossibility
this is the art of the possible an old
mentor from the Columbus foundation drug
Kyler had this beautiful poster that I
still keep with me every day about the
art of the possible and there's so much
possibility and what people are
discovering right now so nothing's for
sure and everything we do every day
makes a difference and that changes that
curve thank you governor I'm told I'm I
had the last question and each hour with
Ohio Public Radio and Television
Statehouse news bureau there are private
quote/unquote non-essential businesses
out there that say that they cannot
close unless you tell them to close do
you see that to be the case or is it on
them is it an individual's
responsibility to close if they think
they should look we're happy to talk to
any company like that we have you know
had situations in the past when we
started through this some of the early
decisions we were told that you know we
would tell somebody to close and they
said well you have to order us to close
and they had some legal reasons
insurance reasons other reasons so we're
open to certainly to discussion I mean
the ultimate goal here is to keep people
safe
and if that fits in with keeping people
safe well we're happy to talk with them
thank you thanks Annie
thank you everybody we'll see you all
tomorrow thank you very much you go to
Mike DeWine dr. Amy Acton the governor's
team giving us an update on the state of
the corona virus pandemic in Ohio no
immediate mandate of shelter in place
but the governor did say regarding that
we have already asked people to shelter
in place if they can we have asked
people to stay home if they can't some
of this is just terminology if there's
no good reason to be out stay home and
dr. Acton adding to that saying today
definitely we are on the up slope stay
home to protect essential workers we've
had a case now at a childcare center
we've had a case at a nursing home here
in Ohio right now we've got 119
confirmed cases ranging in age from 2
years to 91 years old and you have to
she said you have to take this seriously
have to stop the spread so stay home dr.
Amy act and also saying in reference to
a report that there has been one death
in the Maumee area outside Toledo she
does say there is under investigation it
is not yet confirmed she's letting the
officials there try to figure out what
happened in this case and she's going to
share that with them a lot of people
thinking of course the governor and of
course the Ohio Department of Health for
these daily news briefs a lot of people
saying they're getting tired of hearing
the same information but they want to
stay in front they can never say the
citizens here in Ohio can never say well
the governor didn't tell us the health
department health department didn't tell
us a lot of information coming out of
this news conference from what they're
going to do with the jails and what
they're going to do with people who are
filing unemployment now who need it now
things within the court as well there
are a lot of interesting things that we
have to unpack yeah our team coverage
continues right now
Ted Hart is in Hilliard as the effort to
feed seniors ramps up and Dan Pearlman
is learning how those on the front lines
are getting equipped to fight the virus
but we begin with NBC fours Adrienne
Robbins with the very latest from the
governor
in a long press conference this
afternoon Adrienne governor Mike DeWine
wrapped up just minutes ago but the
strongest message really came from dr.
Amy Acton today she said time is of the
essence she said we are certainly on the
up slope of that curve that we've been
talking about flattening for quite a
while now and now is the time to take
this seriously
and do some of the recommended things
that they've been talking about for
weeks now her message was one of urgency
obviously she said we need to stop
getting caught up in what we don't have
like enough tests or what we could have
done and think about action
dr. Acton pointed to the recent news of
a childcare worker in cases in a nursing
home testing positive as a sign that we
need people to be listening to their
recommendations of staying home washing
your hands and practicing social
distancing we are definitely on the
upslope now and it is urgent for those
of you and we all know some folks and
our families or people in our
communities try to talk to each other it
is time to heed this call you need to
stay home if you can it all stay home
with your family you need to follow the
guidance that we have provided and take
it seriously so that we can protect our
essential workers now the governor was
joined by several state agencies today
who are all preparing for their own
coronavirus update and the Chief Justice
talking about getting local courts ready
to continue to serve citizens with the
justice that they need but also limiting
face-to-face interactions the office of
Medicaid was also here they talked about
expanding Medicaid services using
telehealth so people won't have to
actually leave their homes and then also
the Department of Aging and one message
she had was people who want to do
something it's as easy as calling the
elderly people in your life just call
them say hi know that they didn't forget
about you offer to run errands for them
and of course if you do have to visit
them take those common sense precautions
we've been talking about again washing
your
hands coughing in your in your elbow
anything to try to keep those people in
your life safe local for you at the
Statehouse I major in Robbins NBC four
all right thank you so much well if you
have supplies donate that is the message
from city county and state leaders when
it comes to personal protective
equipment NBC 4s Dan Perlman joining us
now live from the Franklin County
Emergency Management headquarters with
how the team there is giving you an
opportunity to heelp just help out Dan
yeah absolutely you know they are
opening their doors for you to donate
that personal protective equipment or
PPE they're gonna do this every weekday
they are starting today and as you can
see right over here the donations are
already starting to come in donors tell
me they have heard the message from dr.
Acton and others that both in Ohio and
across the country there is a shortage
in PPE so they wanted to help one donor
I spoke with brought supplies from an
area school district another came with
gloves masks and aprons from the Ohio
History Connection we wanted to help
we're working from home right now so we
don't need these things and other people
need them a lot more than we do at the
moment so we wanted to do it we could
now take a look at your screen this is
the equipment needed gowns non sterile
gloves surgical masks with ear loops and
95 masks hand sanitizer and viral swabs
as well as viral vials now you can
donate there's those here as you are
able I did
just moments ago post all of the
information including the address and
the hours on how to get here to our
website that is NBC for i.com local for
you in columbus dan Perlman NBC 4 thanks
for that Dan on a normal weekday seniors
would gather at the Hilliard Center for
lunch maybe some various social
activities but these are not normal
times the Senior Center is closed and
all activities are canceled but as NBC 4
reported that Hart found lunch is still
being served drive-thru style yeah well
like so many places where people
normally gather the coronavirus has
forced the closure here of the Senior
Center in Hilliard and this is where
dozens of seniors normally play cards do
puzzles and other things together
including share a meal but now just like
restaurants this has become a carry-out
operation staff members are preparing
hot meals for seniors who drive up to
the front door during the noon hour for
carryout today was a big day
porkchops apparently a particularly
popular item with the seniors and while
handing out the meals staff members are
also checking on the seniors well-being
and any other needs that they might have
the seniors say that they miss the
face-to-face time with their friends but
they are grateful for the five-dollar
drive-through lunches and the brief
interaction that they do get with the
staff when my husband passed I'm I would
cook but I didn't feel like eating it
but coming here they give you
encouragement they give you friendship
and now they're feeding us during the
time of crisis you can't beat that this
is priceless and any senior citizen in
Hillyard is eligible for these carry out
lunches they do need though to call in
and get on the list the day before and
the seniors can also sign up for calls
from this from the city checking on
their well-being
through a program that they call the
kind care call program local for you and
live in Hillyard tonight Ted Hart NBC
for making a difference Ted thank you so
much to the Ohio Department of Health
saying that they will keep the
coronavirus call center up and running
throughout this pandemic to help answer
any questions you might have
call that number on your screen 1 8 3 3
4 2 7 56 34 you can talk to a nurse or
infectious disease expert your bank may
be next to make